% Self-Appraisal 2011
% George K. Thiruvathukal


# Teaching

## Evaluations

Spring 2011

Course                       TCEs/Students     Course Rating  Instructor Rating   GPA
-------------------------    ----------        -----          -----               -----
336-436 Markup Languages     5/15              9.67           9.67                3.7
339-439 Distributed Systems  10/15             8.45           8.33                3.6
-------------------------    ----------        -----          -----               -----

Summer 2011

Course                       TCEs/Students     Course Rating  Instructor Rating   GPA
-------------------------    ----------        -----          -----               -----
312-412 FOSS Practicum       0/13              N/A            N/A                 3.9
-------------------------    ----------        -----          -----               -----

Fall 2011

Course                       TCEs/Students     Course Rating  Instructor Rating   GPA
-------------------------    ----------        -----          -----               -----
374-410 Operating Systems    5/12              9.25           9.0                 3.5
-------------------------    ----------        -----          -----               -----

Comments beyond the evaluations:

- The TCE participation rate in 336-436 and 374-410 is much lower than would be desired. I sent the notices from Blackboard and am wondering whether they are getting marked as spam in student folders. 

- The GPAs listed in all courses may appear high. In fact, these numbers represent about a 0.2 drop from the historic averages in these courses. By the time students get to these courses, in many cases, these are majors and graduate students who want to take a challenging course (and are capable of meeting the challenge).

- This year, I redesigned the Operating Systems course (374-410) to place much greater emphasis on advanced systems programming and operating systems internals. Working with my former student, Joe Kaylor, we co-authored a complete set of notes for this new course. We have plans to continue developing this course for future offerings. This course proved to be demanding for many students.

- Each of the courses above has its own web site:

    - Operating Systems Design/Implementation, <http://osdi.etl.luc.edu>
    - Distributed Systems, <http://distributed.etl.luc.edu>
    - Markup Languages, <http://markup.etl.luc.edu>

## Other Evidence of Teaching Effectiveness

- Committed to the university mantra of preparing students to lead extraordinary lives. My teaching covers the complete spectrum from core knowledge to the advanced theory and practice of computer science. 
- Courses taught in a hybrid in-class/online form. Instructor and all course materials are highly available to students through the effective use of technology, including instant messaging (chat), email, threaded discussions, course management software (Blackboard), and the web (via Google Code). 
- Placement of strong emphasis on agile software development methodology and the use of open standards. My approach emphasizes language-independent thinking, which I believe positions students well for job opportunities. 
- Placement of strong emphasis on literate programming, where students enrolled in computing courses are fully expected to master the art of documentation and dissemination. Despite the significant amount of additional work to students in my upper-division classes, the course evaluations have been largely unaffected, because students know that real-world CS opportunities will demand technical writing skills.
- Frequently received feedback from students who have entered the workforce on how the knowledge and skills acquired through my courses have helped them compete in the job market and perform in their new positions. Similar feedback received from employers. 
- Students who have taken my courses are highly successful at getting placed in Ph.D. programs, internships and permanent positions. My NSF and other extramural grants have supported all recent graduates from our department to be admitted to Ph.D. programs (Matt Bone, Peter Aarested, and Chris Bun), including many students who were worthy of pursuing a Ph.D. (e.g. Benjamin Gonzalez). 
- Making innovative and effective use of professional networking sites LinkedIn and Facebook through public profiles on these sites to remain in touch with alumni and support their placement efforts.
Involvement of respected guest lecturers in my courses (e.g. Brian Fitzpatrick from Google, Curtis Tuckey from Oracle Corporation, and Gregor von Laszewski from Indiana University).
- Many alumni now working in the industry are frequent guest lecturers in my senior and graduate level courses.
- Key contributor to the new MA in Digital Humanities/Textual Studies. 

## Independent Study and Research Students

The following students are working on independent study/research projects, which in many cases are jointly supervised by myself and Dr. Läufer:

Fall 2011:

- MyInt Htoo, XML/Analytics
- Benjamin Pellettieri, Document Object Model for Standoff Markup project <http://standoffmarkup.org>
- Christopher Pauliks,

Summer 2011:

- Scott Kreider, use cases for RestFS/NOFS research

Spring 2011:

- Mark Johnson, financial mathematics/modeling and functional programming


## Publications with Students

See the research section for a list of publications, including those published with Loyola students.

## Category Rating and Summary

I continue to maintain high-quality teaching and have a track record of courses that never go stale and are highly engaging to students. I also continue to pioneer innovative new courses. In addition, my teaching and research efforts are synergistic and both aspects strongly influence and enhance one another.

## Final Rating

5/5

# Research

## Projects and Papers in Progress

The following are joint projects and papers with Dr. Konstantin Läufer and students the Emerging Technologies Laboratory:

- Evaluation of high-level languages and frameworks for embedded Linux development
- CIRFS: (universal) cross-institutional repository filesystem
- Comparison of software-related failure rates of different filesystem/operating system combinations
- Exploration of high-performance algorithms in the Haskell language
- An integrated open-source home automation and multimedia system
- A agent modeling framework for the JVM based on the Scala language
- Representational state transfer and the uniform file system interface
- Service-/resource-oriented architectures involving embedded/mobile devices
- A comparison of various service-oriented reference architectures
- Testing in the context of service-oriented architectures
- Trull framework (integration of thread-based and event-loop concurrency) and Trunit (extension of - JUnit for event-based component testing)


The following are joint projects and papers with the Steve Jones and Peter Shillingsburg and the Center for Digital Humanities and Textual Studies:

- Presentation at the Society of Textual Studies on Jones and Thiruvathukal, Codename: Revolution, the book we are publishing with MIT Press.
- Work on a new language for intuitive XML authoring and editing. See <http://standoffmarkup.org>
- Continued work on collaborative tools for textual scholarship and archival projects.

## Publications (2009, 2010, 2011)

### Peer-Reviewed Conference Proceedings

1. Steven E. Jones and George K. Thiruvathukal, *Platform Studies and the Construction of Game Space: The Nintendo Wii as a social platform*, <http://chicagocolloquium.org/wp-content/uploads/2011/11/dhcs2011_submission_27.pdf>.

1. David Dennis, Konstantin Läufer, and George K. Thiruvathukal, *Initial experience in moving key academic department functions to social networking sites*, In Proc. 6th International Conference on Software and Data Technologies (ICSOFT) (July 2011), <http://ecommons.luc.edu/cs_facpubs/36/>.

1. Steven E. Jones and George K. Thiruvathukal, *The Object of Platform Studies: Relational Materialities and the Social Platform (the case of the Nintendo Wii)*, Digital Humanities 2011 Book of Abstracts, pp. 163-164, 2011. <http://ecommons.luc.edu/cs_facpubs/28/>.

1. Joe Kaylor, Konstantin Läufer, and George K. Thiruvathukal. 2011. *RestFS: resources and services are filesystems, too*. In Proceedings of the Second International Workshop on RESTful Design (WS-REST '11), Cesare Pautasso and Erik Wilde (Eds.). ACM, New York, NY, USA, 39-46,  <http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/1967428.1967439>.

1. Joseph P. Kaylor, Konstantin Läufer, and George K. Thiruvathukal. *RestFS: The Filesystem as a Connector Abstraction for Flexible Resource and Service Composition*. In Cloud Computing: Methodology, System, and Applications (edited by Lizhe Wang, Rajiv Ranjan, Jinjun Chen, Boualem Benatallah), CRC Press, Boca Raton, Florida, USA, September 2011, <http://ecommons.luc.edu/cs_facpubs/45/>.

1. Joseph P. Kaylor, Konstantin Läufer, George K. Thiruvathukal, *REST on Routers? Preliminary Lessons for Language Designers, Framework Architects, and App Developers*, In Proc. 6th International Conference on Software and Data Technologies (ICSOFT) (July 2011), <http://ecommons.luc.edu/cs_facpubs/35/>.

1. Konstantin Läufer, Chandra N. Sekharan, and George K. Thiruvathukal, *PDC Modules for Every Level: A Comprehensive Model for Incorporating PDC Topics into the Existing Undergraduate Curriculum*, In 1st NSF/TCPP Workshop on Parallel and Distributed Computing Education (EduPar), May 2011, <http://ecommons.luc.edu/cs_facpubs/53/>.

1. Joe Kaylor, Konstantin Läufer, and George K. Thiruvathukal, Online Layered File System (OLFS): A layered and versioned filesystem and performance analysi, In Proceedings of Electro/Information Technology 2010 (EIT 2010), <http://ecommons.luc.edu/cs_facpubs/40/>.

1. Steven E. Jones, Peter Shillingsburg, and George K. Thiruvathukal. *E-Carrel: An Environment for Collaborative Textual Scholarship*. Journal of the Chicago Colloquium on Digital Humanities and Computer Science 1, no. 2 (June 16, 2010), <http://ecommons.luc.edu/cs_facpubs/1/>.

### Other Journals

1. George K. Thiruvathukal, *An Exceptionally Useful Exploration*, Computing in Science and Engineering, vol. 13, no. 1, pp. 5-8, Jan./Feb. 2011, doi:10.1109/MCSE.2011.3, <http://ecommons.luc.edu/cs_facpubs/20/>.

1. George K. Thiruvathukal, *Beyond CiSE and Back to the Future*, Computing in Science and Engineering, vol. 13, no. 3, pp. 4-5, May/June 2011, doi:10.1109/MCSE.2011.44, <http://ecommons.luc.edu/cs_facpubs/18/>.

1. George K. Thiruvathukal, *Novel Architectures and Accelerators*, Computing Now, http://www.computer.org/portal/web/computingnow/archive/february2011, <http://ecommons.luc.edu/cs_facpubs/54/>.

1. Konstantin Läufer, George K. Thiruvathukal, David Dennis, *Moving Academic Department Functions to Social Networks and Clouds: Initial Experiences*, Computing in Science and Engineering, vol. 13, no. 5, pp. 84-89, Sep./Oct. 2011, doi:10.1109/MCSE.2011.85, <http://ecommons.luc.edu/cs_facpubs/19/>.

1. George K. Thiruvathukal, *Your Local Cloud-Enabled Library*, Computing in Science and Engineering, vol. 12, no. 4, pp. 5-6, July/Aug. 2010, doi:10.1109/MCSE.2010.94, <http://ecommons.luc.edu/cs_facpubs/17/>.

1. George K. Thiruvathukal, Konrad Hinsen, Konstantin Laufer, Joe Kaylor, *Virtualization for Computational Scientists*, Computing in Science and Engineering, pp. 52-61, July/August, 2010, <http://ecommons.luc.edu/cs_facpubs/16/>.

1. Konrad Hinsen, Konstantin Läufer, George K. Thiruvathukal, *Essential Tools: Version Control Systems*, Computing in Science and Engineering, vol. 11, no. 6, pp. 84-91, Nov./Dec. 2009, doi:10.1109/MCSE.2009.194, <http://ecommons.luc.edu/cs_facpubs/27/>.

1. Konstantin Laufer, George K. Thiruvathukal, *The Promises of Typed, Pure, and Lazy Functional Programming: Part II*, Computing in Science and Engineering, pp. 68-75, September/October, 2009, <http://ecommons.luc.edu/cs_facpubs/25/>.

1. Konstantin Läufer, George K. Thiruvathukal, Ryohei Nishimura, Carlos Ramírez Martínez-Eiroa, *Putting a Slug to Work*, Computing in Science and Engineering, vol. 11, no. 2, pp. 62-68, Mar./Apr. 2009, doi:10.1109/MCSE.2009.35, <http://ecommons.luc.edu/cs_facpubs/23/>.

1. George K. Thiruvathukal, *Computational Thinking--and Doing*, Computing in Science and Engineering, vol. 11, no. 6, pp. 4, Nov./Dec. 2009, doi:10.1109/MCSE.2009.190, <http://ecommons.luc.edu/cs_facpubs/26/>.

1. George K. Thiruvathukal, *Introducing Computing Now*, Computing in Science and Engineering, vol. 11, no. 4, pp. 8-10, July/Aug. 2009, doi:10.1109/MCSE.2009.124, <http://ecommons.luc.edu/cs_facpubs/24/>.

1. George K. Thiruvathukal, *Web 2.0 Publishing and Happy 1.0, Computing Now!*, <http://www.computer.org/portal/web/computingnow/archive/may2009>.


### Technical Reports via eCommons

1. Joe Kaylor, Konstantin Läufer, and George K. Thiruvathukal, *Naked Object File System (NOFS): A Framework to Expose an Object-Oriented Domain Model as a File System*, May 2010, <http://ecommons.luc.edu/cs_facpubs/6/>.

## Recent International Invitations

- Gave a presentation at the workshop on Users, Usability, and User Engagement, Oxford University (invited in December 2009; presented January 18, 2010 with all expenses paid by the organizers), http://research3.org/events/workshop_four.php 

- Invited talk and session organizer at Jadavpur University, Kolkata, India (February 2011).

## Open-Source Software Releases

My entire list of projects is at http://thiruvathukal.com. Here are some highlights:

- High-Performance Java Platform Computing, <http://hpjpc.googlecode.com>. The PDF book has been downloaded 2,327 times (without even being announced). The Java examples have been downloaded 1,000 times; C# examples about 300 times. I have also been contacted by Michael Phillippsen in Germany to obtain the 0/1 Knapsack and other example codes for use in his High Performance Computing class. 
- Better XML, <http://betterxml.googlecode.com>. We have not done a public release of this software yet but the paper and presentation have been downloaded 120 and 223 times, respectively, again with no publicity. 
- Layered/versioned filesytems, http://olfs.googlecode.com. This is an active project with Kaylor, Läufer, and Thiruvathukal that is scheduled for a first beta release this year. We expect this project to have very high impact. This project allows you to keep multiple versions (generations) of files without having to rename them, so it is easy to understand the benefits, even for a non-computing person!  

## Impact/Citations

Over 100 citations (excluding self-citations) according to the ResearchIndex/CiteSeer Scientific Literature Digital Library. Many hundreds of citations on Google Scholar for some papers not picked up by CiteSeer.

## Extramural Funding

- Submitted 2011: George K. Thiruvathukal, Konstantin Läufer, and Catherine Putonti, SHF: Small: RestFS: Filesystems as Stable Connectors for Web Service Composition and Interoperability, ~$500,000.
- Awarded 2011: Dalberg (PI, UNC Charlotte) and Thiruvathukal (PI, LUC), Collaborative Research: BPC-LSA: ACM SIGBP: Forming an ACM Special Interest Group to Scale the Impact of BPC Activities, $38,782 (to Loyola University Chicago)
- Awarded 2009–2010: Peter Shillingsburg (PI), Steven Jones, and George K. Thiruvathukal, Humanities Research Infrastructure and Tools (HRIT): An Environment for Collaborative Textual Scholarship, $50,000. 
- Awarded 2009: George K. Thiruvathukal and Catherine Putonti, Microsoft Unrestricted Gift to support HPC and Bioinformatics Research, $15,000. 
- Awarded 2009: George K. Thiruvathukal, Computational Cluster from Microsoft, $100,000 (estimated value). 
- Awarded 2008–2009: R. Greenberg (PI), K. Läufer (co-PI), C. Putonti (co-PI), W. Honig (co-PI) and G. K. Thiruvathukal (co-PI). Improving Metropolitan Participation to Accelerate Computing Throughput and Success (IMPACTS). National Science Foundation, Broadening Participation in Computing (BCP) program, Award #0837769, $141,711. 
- Awarded 2007–2008: W. Honig (PI), K. Läufer, and G. K. Thiruvathukal. Learning the Wonders of Computing with Wireless Collaboration. HP Technology for Teaching Grant #1900784, $68,000. 

## Intramural Funding

- Awarded 2009–2010: G. K. Thiruvathukal (PI), N. Tuchman, J. Frendreis, P. Geddes, and D. Slavsky, Research Stimulation: Chicago Clean Air, Clean Water, $10,000. Renewed in Fall 2009 for an additional $10,000. 
- Awarded 2009–2010: S. Jones (PI), G. K. Thiruvathukal (co-PI), and P. Shillingsburg, Research Stimulation: Modernist Circles/Textual Studies, $20,000. 
Awarded 2010, S. Jones, G. K. Thiruvathukal, E. English, and …, Digitizing the Michalek Collection, $20,000.


## Category Rating and Summary

This has been another exceptionally strong year for me in research output, both in terms of computer science and in my fruitful collaboratoin in digital humanities and textual studies. In addition, progress continues on our CUERP work, despite the lack of funding for this project and some leadership changes. We’re well poised for future funding in the systems/languages/frameworks area and digital humanities.

## Final Rating

5/5

# Service

## Peer Reviewing and Conference Committees

Program Committee, ICSoft 2009 and 2010
Program Committee, Cloud Computing 2010

## Panel Service

- I have served on multiple panels at the National Science Foundation and the National Endowment for the Humanities. In Summer 2010, I was asked to serve on three NSF panels but was only able to serve on two of them.
- I may have the distinction of being one of the few people at Loyola ever to serve on panels at both NEH and NSF, especially in the same year.

## Other Professional Service

- Associate Editor-in-Chief  for CISE Magazine, since 2008.
- Associate Editor-in-Chief  for IEEE Computing Now, since 2009.
- At Large Member, IEEE Computer Society Publications Board, since 2010. (This is one of the higest governing body in the Computer Society that oversees all publications, including magazines and transactions.)

## University Service

- Search Committee, School of Communication, 2010, resulted in the hire of Meghan Dougherty, Assistant Professor of Communication.
- Search Committee, Non-Tenure Track Position in Digital Humanities (for the new MA in Digital Humanities program).
- Member, New Content Management System Selection Committee, 2010. Resulted in the selection of the Terminal Four CMS for university web sites.
- Member, Research Data Center Steering Committee, new in 2010.
- Member, Finance UPC, new in AY 2010-2011.
- Member, Institutional Repositories Advisory Committee (Libraries), new in AY 2010-2011. Resulted in the selection and deployment of the Loyola eCommons.

## Department Service

- Computing Committee Chairperson and Laboratory Director, since 2003. (No load reduction or supplemental salary is received for this important role.)
- Free/Open Source Software at Loyola, http://www.fossal.org, since 2008.
- Graduate Program Realignment Committee (Chair), since 2010.

## Category Rating and Summary

This has been a particularly demanding year for my time in terms of service. I have been called upon to perform strategic service that has resulted in many meetings and significant time outside of work hours. In addition, my service spans multiple areas of the university, including the department, the new center, ITS, the library, and (most recently) university policy committees. I continue to lead and innovate our departmental computing and supervise Miao, often during evenings (owing to my demands at both campuses). It is a workload I can handle, and I think I am doing an exceptional job in areas that are of vital importance to the department, the center, and the university. My service to NSF and IEEE this year has also been an excellent example of my commitment to professional service as well.

## Final Rating

5/5

# Professional Goals for Current Calendar Year

## Teaching

- Working on new curriculum for COMP 170, our foundational introduction course for all departmental majors

## Research and Scholarship

My key goal in this area is further to increase the amount of external funding. The above-mentioned proposal submissions, publications, and ongoing research work are expected to help with this goal. I also plan to continue my research in these areas: 
collaboration with Dr. Läufer in service- and resource-oriented architectures involving embedded/mobile devices 
multidisciplinary collaborations with the Center for Textual Studies and Digital Humanties (Drs. Jones and Shillingsburg) and the Loyola University Medical Center (Preventive Medicine/Epidemiology, Drs. Luke and Shoham) 
collaboration with Dr. Läufer on Trull (integration of thread-based and event-loop concurrency) and Trunit (extension of JUnit for event-based component testing) frameworks 
collaboration with Dr. Läufer on testing in the context of service-oriented architectures 
continued work on layered/versioned filesystems with Mr. Joe Kaylor and Dr. Läufer 

## Departmental, College, and University Service

Further service on the following committees: 

- Research Data Center (RDC) Planning Committee 
- Continued support of departmental computing needs as director and member of the departmental computing committee. 
- Helping the department with various proposals (thesis options and centers). Specifically, I want to work on getting a thesis option added to the M.S. program (for high merit students) and reconvene the planning committee exploring an interdisciplinary Ph.D. in Computational Science and Informatics. 
- Helping with transfer/articulation requests as part of the distributed UPD role. I’ve been doing these since November 2010.
- Institutional repositories (eCommons) committee, Libraries

Continued work on multidisciplinary initiatives between CS and other departments: 

- Digital Humanities and Textual Studies: Collaborating with Profs. Steve Jones, Peter Shillingsburg, and Allen Frantzen on various projects and the proposed center. We are developing collaborative software tools for digital humanities and textual studies projects as part of our new NEH challenge grant. 
- Biological Sciences: Collaborating with David Treering on the Chicago Clean Air, Clean Water data warehouse.